OCR with mlflow blog post (#321)
mlflow/mlflow-website: website/blog/2025-07-01-mlflow-prompt-evaluate/index.md

In this example, we will build an LLM-based tool that will apply OCR to scanned documents.

## What is OCR?

Optical Character Recognition, or OCR, is the process of extracting text from scanned documents and images. This outputted text is machine-encoded, editable, and searchable - opening up a variety of downstream use cases.

There are a few types of OCR, ranging from Simple to Intelligent. Today we will be focusing on the latter. This incorporates AI and ML for increased capabilities like handwriting recognition and adaptation to new styles.

Fun fact - the earliest form of OCR was introduced in 1914. It was a device designed for blind indivuduals to read printed text without Braille called the Optophone.
![Optophone](/img/blog/prompt-evaluate/margaret-hogan-used-the-black-sounding-optophone-to-read-a-book.jpg)

## The Challenge with Prompting

> A good prompt engineer knows how to combine analytical thinking with creativity in order to get the most out of their GenAI applications. This is all while ensuring alignment with the high level goals of an organization. To refine, iterate, and automate their process, they often need the technical skills, or simply the additional effort, to do so. How can we allow prompt engineers to focus on the crafting of prompts, and less on the maintenance?

Reviewer: Let's use proper grammar and use a more professional tone

> There are also an abundance of challenges related verifying and assessing the expected output. Did the prompt address the complexity of the situation? Did it have the appropriate context? Too much context? Did it introduce bias?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are also an abundance of challenges related to verifying and assessing the expected output. Did it have the appropriate context? Did it introduce bias?
```

Having a robust way to iterate on prompts and assess their accuracy becomes paramount in building production-ready GenAI applications.

## MLflow Key Capabilities

### MLflow Prompt Registry

[MLflow Prompt Registry](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/genai/prompt-version-mgmt/prompt-registry) addresses many of the challenges prompt engineers face today. With a Git-inspired set up, prompt engineers have a streamlined way to version, track, and reuse prompts. Let's look at a typical flow.

**1. Create and Register Your Prompt:** Each prompt is registered as a **Prompt Object**. This becomes a versioned, paramaterized template that can be dynamically filled at runtime. The object will include a **name** (unique identifier), **template text**, **version #**, **commit message**, **metadata/tags** (optional), and **aliases**.  
Register your prompt with -
`mlflow.genai.register_prompt()`

> **2. Manage Aliases:** Aliases ensure prompts remain aligned with their intended use. For example, "Production" and "Staging" aliases tie them to their respective environments, simplifying traceability, orchestration, and governance of our prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**2. Manage Aliases:** Aliases ensure prompts remain aligned with their intended use. For example, "Production" and "Staging" aliases tie prompts to their respective environments, simplifying traceability, orchestration, and governance.
```

> **3. Load and Use Prompts:** We are now ready to load in our prompt and start using it with our GenAI applications, like our LLM-backed OCR tool.  

Reviewer: Let's maintain sentence structure across all 3 lists. "We are now ready" is a departure from the defintion-based structure above

> Load in your prompt with -
> `mlflow.genai.load_prompt()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> **4. Iterate on Prompts:** An important step in our process is improving and updating prompts. This can be done any number of times while moving toward the accuracy required, all while staying organized in a centralized repository for prompt management.  

Reviewer: https://github.com/mlflow/mlflow-website/pull/321/files#r2167692229

Just need to standardize structure - fine to standardize on this or the prior

<br/>

> 

Reviewer: The value prop to highlight is we can outsource "cheaper" prompt optimization to non-technical SMEs

### MLflow Evaluate

[MLflow Evaluate](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/genai/eval-monitor/) is key in our example today as we iterate on and improve our OCR tool. Evaluation techniques within MLflow allow us to systematically asses the performance of both traditional ML models and LLMs by incorporating built-in and custom metrics in our model iteration.

> [Built-in metrics](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/api_reference/python_api/mlflow.metrics.html) are a great way to get started. They are automatically computed based on your model type. The exact set will depend on your configurations, but for LLM and agent evaluation we are able to follow traditional NLP metrics like BLEU and ROUGE, and LLM-judged metrics that will assess outputs like accuracy, relevance, toxicity, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Built-in metrics](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/api_reference/python_api/mlflow.metrics.html) are a great way to get started. They are automatically computed based on your model type. The exact set will depend on your configurations, but for LLM and agent evaluation we are able to follow traditional NLP metrics like BLEU and ROUGE, and LLM-judged metrics that will assess criteria, such as accuracy, relevance and toxicity.
```

> Custom metrics can enable additional validations for traditional models, but really come in handy for our GenAI and agentic workflows. Custom metric functions are passed into the `mlflow.evaluate` API. The function signature is flexible, allowing us to pass in things like request, response, expected_response, guidelines, trace, tool_calls, etc. This enables you to meet evaluation criteria and scoring thresholds to ensure the model is up to production standards.

Reviewer: Can we rewrite this? Plz include
1. Why do we use custom metrics? (current solid)
2. What is a custom metric? (current could be improved)
3. Closing sentence (current is good content but confusing wording)

> Results are all logged in the MLflow run, which can be accessed through the MLflow UI or programatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Results are all logged to an MLflow run, which can be accessed through the MLflow UI or APIs.
```

> We will see MLflow Evaluate in action as we walk through our OCR use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see MLflow Evaluate in action as we walk through our OCR use case.
```
Active voice

**Tracking:**
[MLflow Tracking](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/ml/tracking) allows you to log, organize, and visualize experiment results. This makes our result set more ingestable and auditable.

**Tracing:**
[MLflow Tracing](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/genai/tracing) takes tracking one step further in order to have end-to-end observability for GenAI workflows. Again, this keeps everything organized as we work through and iterate on our workflows.

**Autolog**
Another extension of tracking is [automatic logging](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/ml/tracking/autolog). This will simplify the tracking process by reducing the need for manual log statements. Metrics, params, artifacts, and other useful information will be logged automatically.

See [Further Reading](#further-reading) for additional blogs digging into these concepts.

## Our Use Case

Our data consists of scanned documents and their corresponding text extracted as JSON. Like mentioned, our goal is to utilize LLMs to build a tool that will handle the text extraction (OCR) for us.

## Setting it Up

> We require the following packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's install the following packages.
```

```
openai
mlflow
tiktoken
aiohttp
```

which can be installed in the requirement.txt file:

```bash

> pip install -r requirements.txt -qU

Reviewer: Just install the libs

```

<br/>

> Since we will need to make calls to OpenAI's LLMs, we can utilize helper functions to read the OpenAI API key that is stored in a (known) secure location. We can then set the environment variable ```OPENAI_API_KEY```.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simplicity, we will leverage OpenAI, however this tutorial extends to other LLM providers as well. 
```

```python
import os

def _set_openai_api_key_for_demo() -> bool:
    """Dummy method for doing easy auth in a notebook environment during the live demo."""
    try:
        with open("/XXXX/openai_api_key.txt", "r") as f: #replace this with your actual directory
            os.environ["OPENAI_API_KEY"] = f.read().strip()
            return True
    except Exception:
        pass

    return False
```

Alternatively, we can prompt the user to type the OpenAI API key without echoing using `getpass()`:

```python
import os
from utils import _set_openai_api_key_for_demo

if (not _set_openai_api_key_for_demo()) and (not os.getenv("OPENAI_API_KEY")):
    os.environ["OPENAI_API_KEY"] = getpass("Your OpenAI API Key: ")
```

### Explore Our Data

> We are going to use the [FUNSD dataset](https://guillaumejaume.github.io/FUNSD/) for this exercise, which contains around 200 fully annotated forms, in the form of semantic entity labels and word groupings as shown in the example below:

Reviewer: Deduplicate redunant info from this comment: https://github.com/mlflow/mlflow-website/pull/321/files#r2167713182

All of these annotations are encoded as JSON files like below (for detailed description of each entry, refer to the [original paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.13538.pdf)):

```
{
        "form": [
        {
            "id": 0,
            "text": "Registration No.",
            "box": [94,169,191,186],
            "linking": [
                [0,1]
            ],
            "label": "question",
            "words": [
                {
                    "text": "Registration",
                    "box": [94,169,168,186]
                },
                {
                    "text": "No.",
                    "box": [170,169,191,183]
                }
            ]
        },
        {
            "id": 1,
            "text": "533",
            "box": [209,169,236,182],
            "label": "answer",
            "words": [
                {
                    "box": [209,169,236,182
                    ],
                    "text": "533"
                }
            ],
            "linking": [
                [0,1]
            ]
        }
    ]
    }
```

#### 1. Observe Data

> Let's try to read a random annotated file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's read a randomly selected annotated file.
```

    elements = {item["id"]: item for item in data}
    for item in data:
        if item["label"] != "question" or not item["linking"]:
            continue
        for q_id, a_id in item["linking"]:
            if q_id != item["id"]:
                continue
            answer = elements.get(a_id)
            if answer and answer["label"] == "answer":
                q_text = " ".join(w["text"] for w in item["words"])
                a_text = " ".join(w["text"] for w in answer["words"])
                qa_pairs[q_text] = a_text
    return qa_pairs

def get_json(file_name: str, directory: str = ANNOTATIONS_DIRECTORY) -> dict:
    file_name += ".json" if not file_name.endswith(".json") else file_name
    path = os.path.join(directory, file_name)
    with open(path, "r", encoding="utf-8") as f:
        contents = json.load(f)["form"]
        if isinstance(contents, list):
            if all(isinstance(page, list) for page in contents):
                flat_items = [item for page in contents for item in page]
            else:
                flat_items = contents
            return _extract_qa_pairs(flat_items)
        else:
            return _extract_qa_pairs(contents)

```

> What does _\_extract_qa_pairs_ do here? Let's break down it down for a second:

Reviewer: sadly too informal

- We create a look-up dictionary _qa_pairs_
- We identify "question" items that have linked answer pair(s) in the form of _(q_id, a_id)_
- Construct question-answer pairs by joining the individual words  
  <br/>
  Subsequently, we can call _get_json_ to get the OCR-identified question/answer structure based on the form image data.

```python

> from utils import get_image, get_json, get_random_files

Reviewer: Note that they have to save the above code to a utils dir. I think it's easier to omit the import and assume this one large script

from IPython.display import Image, display

random_file = get_random_files()
image_bytes = get_image(random_file)
get_json(random_file)

```

#### 2. Example LLM Call

> Before we make a call to OpenAI, we need to set up MLflow tracking and create and experiment. We can then automatically log all the API calls we make using `autolog()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we make a call to OpenAI, we need to set up MLflow tracking and create and experiment. We can then automatically log all the API calls we make using `mlflow.openai.autolog()`
```

```python
import mlflow

mlflow.set_tracking_uri(os.getcwd() + "/mlruns")
mlflow.set_experiment("quickstart")
mlflow.openai.autolog()
```

Our next step will be to set mlruns as the local directory for MLflow tracking. We will create an experiment called quickstart and log the API calls for metrics like etc.

> On the OpenAI side, we initialize the OpenAI client and provide the prompt to the LLM (for example, instructing the LLM to act as an OCR expert).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the OpenAI side, we initialize the OpenAI client and provide the prompt to the LLM, for example, instructing the LLM to act as an OCR expert.
```

_get_image()_ can be a neat helper function that can handle

        Reading the image file from a specified path
        Resizing the file and convert it into a JPEG of a specified quality

```python
import base64
from PIL import Image
from io import BytesIO

def _compress_image(file_path: str, quality: int = 40, max_size: tuple[int, int] = (1000, 1000)) -> bytes:
    """Compresses an image by resizing and converting to JPEG with given quality."""
    with Image.open(file_path) as img:
        img = img.convert("RGB")  # Ensure JPEG compatibility
        img.thumbnail(max_size)  # Resize
        buf = BytesIO()
        img.save(buf, format="JPEG", quality=quality)
        return buf.getvalue()

def get_image(
    file_name: str, directory: str = IMAGES_DIRECTORY, encode_as_str: bool = False
) -> bytes:
    file_name += ".png" if not file_name.endswith(".png") else file_name
    path = os.path.join(directory, file_name)
    with open(path, "rb") as f:
        file = f.read()
        compressed = _compress_image(path)

        if encode_as_str:
            return base64.b64encode(compressed).decode("utf-8")
        else:
            return compressed
```

#### 3. Tracing UI [WIP]

> 

Reviewer: Add a paragraph or two describing tracing and why we care. It's a flagship product, so we want to focus on it's value prop

    ![MLflow UI showing the tracing](/img/blog/prompt-evaluate/TracingUI.png)

### Create Model and Evaluate

> In this section, you'll be defining the system prompt, along with extracting the contents of the images which are structured into "questions" and "answers" using an LLM. You'll then track these as MLflow experiment runs,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we'll be defining the system prompt, along with extracting the contents of the images which are structured into lists of "questions" and "answers" using an LLM. We'll then track these as MLflow experiment runs.
```

```python
correct_format = mlflow.metrics.genai.make_genai_metric(
    name="correct_format",
    definition=(
        """The answer is a list of dicts where keys are `question` and `answer`."""
    ),
    grading_prompt=(
        """If formatted correctly, return 1. Otherwise, return 0."""
    ),
    model="openai:/gpt-4o-mini",
    greater_is_better=True,
)
```

#### 2. MLflow Evaluate

In this section, we pass the defined metric _correct_format_ to `mlflow.evaluate()`, which makes for every image selected earlier. The JSONs created from the OCR extraction using `get_json()` can used as the ground truth

```python
def batch_completion(df: pd.DataFrame) -> list[str]:
    return [get_completion(image) for image in df["inputs"]]

eval_result = mlflow.evaluate(
    model=batch_completion,
    data=pd.DataFrame({"inputs": images, "truth": jsons}),
    targets="truth",
    model_type="text",
    extra_metrics=[correct_format],
)
```

[WIP] - Add a screenshot of the MLflow UI + explanation

### Applying Prompt Registry and Evaluate to the OCR use case

> Let's assume you are developing an OCR application, with different roles contributing to the project development. Here's how a Prompt engineer and a ML engineer benefit from these MLflow capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume you are developing an OCR application with different roles contributing to the project development. Here's how a prompt engineer and a ML engineer benefit from these MLflow capabilities.
```

#### Prompt Engineer: Improve the Prompt

> As a Prompt Engineer, you'll be iteratively modifying the prompts and `mlflow.genai.register_prompt()` lets you version different prompts/ system messages that you craft, with the provision to set a template text, and include prompt metadata like author, project, etc. It is also possible to compare different versions of the prompt, and also search for specific prompts from the past.

Reviewer: Plz rewrite for clarity/grammar. 

"You are an expert at making techincal documentation. Rewrite the following text to be more clear, concise, and expand upon areas that need clarification. Maintain professional yet simple language." is a good starting prompt for GPT to rewrite this

> Here's an example of a prompt template, instructing the LLM to generate

Reviewer: Finish sentence

````python
new_template = """\
You are an expert at key information extraction and OCR.

Format as a list of dictionaries as shown below. They keys should only be `question` and `answer`.

```\
[
    {
        "question": "question field",
        "answer": "answer to question field"

    },
...
]
```\

Question refers to a field in the form that takes in information. Answer refers to the information
that is filled in the field.

Follow these rules:
- Only use the information present in the text.
{{ additional_rules }}
"""
````

```python
# Register a new version of an existing prompt
updated_prompt = mlflow.register_prompt(
    name="ocr-question-answer",
    template=new_template,
    version_metadata={
        "author": "author@example.com",
    },
)

> ```

Reviewer: The point of this is the prompt registry decouples prompt engineering from the more-technical aspects of GenAI development. Now non-technical SMEs can work on AI applications

Also because it's registered to a registry, you can easily version and update asynchronously in a CD fashion. Look up the value proposition of model aliasing - it's the same concept for the deployment aspect

#### ML Engineer: Use the Prompt

As an ML Engineer, it's your responsibility to ensure that the OCR application using the LLM can be evaluated against ground truth and the performance can be tracked using the custom GenAI metric. In real applications, you'll go with more than one metric which meets the business requirement.

Here you'll be following the same steps as mentioned in the sections [Defining a Gen AI metric](#1-defining-a-custom-gen-ai-metric-for-evaluation) and [MLflow Evaluate](#2-mlflow-evaluate) using `mlflow.metrics.genai.make_genai_metric()` and `mlflow.evaluate()`

## Conclusion and Next Steps

> From our new OCR tool, we are able to utilize MLflow GenAI capabilities to manage our prompts and evaluate our model. This can be taken further as we look to create more complex and agentic systems.

Reviewer: Fluff ain't useful. Here are some actual next steps, but feel free to add/edit

1. Scale our your custom metrics to better represent the problem. 
2. Iterate with different LLMs and compare the results side-by-side in the MLflow UI.
3. Leveraging tracing and model logging to iteratively improve within the confines of your custom metrics.
